This is a rolling document with the latest, lower down.

Notes for Payroll 15/10/2025 using Cobol with the Free GnuCobol compiler as is
the rest of ACAS.

Adding this folder is a wee bit premature as I have only just started work on
it.  However this is for the attempt to rewrite the USA Payroll system current
as CBASIC code into Cobol to match up with the rest of ACAS.

It is very early days with only the following modules/programs written and even
then some coding error are present no doubt.
I can say py000.cbl should be good as that came from existing code of another
system - sales. payroll.cbl came from sales.cbl with some changes but there are
a lot of comments to cover temp coding from CBASIC code present such as menu
screens that may well need to be used here OR in another program.

At the moment the payroll parameters are stored in their own file and this is
only a Cobol relative file (same as the ACAS system file) - for the moment as
the primary problem I have is the format for each field present within it.
I DO have to examine the basic code to see if I can get a better idea of the
format for each field other than guessing.
Note that some of these fields are boolean in basic and for the
moment I have set them as pic x - set to use Y or N.

Once working out the params, I may well add it into the ACAS system file as
record 5 or records 5 and 6 where 6 is updated by the payroll system when
running - may be.

Lots more to do including removing the various prints in payroll menu and
replacing with a sub menu that has them all in as the menu screen looks too
cluttered.  Decisions, decisions..

This is actually difficult as I have no way of looking at a basic compiler
printout of each program showing the includes which does make it tricky.

For the moment I am using the Old Payroll manual as a basis for some broad logic
with the details coming from the basic code - well that's the idea any way.

I will use the c code accept_numeric (if possible) for the input of all numbers.
I know it works with comp, 3 field definitions and hoping does the same for
display fields, i.e., pic 9(6) / s9(6).99.  etc.

It is a lot cleaner - just have to ensure that it is linked to every programs
that uses it.

More later.

17/10/25 vbc - Added/changed comments above regarding use of accept_numeric.
11/11/25 vbc -

Changed type of file for param to relative, Programs where code is complete :
payroll.cbl - Main menu & application program
py000.cbl  -  Today's date changer
py900.cbl  -  Parameter entry program for all 6 processes, etc.

Next is a program for State and other tax table entries etc but still have to
decide if only one file will be used as format is same for all other than
California.  OK, it was but do not know about now !

So will need to find a few states such as NY, Texas, California and another one
to see if the formats are the same or different and if a Text file is available
along with any documentation.  I will need the date new tables are available and
"assume" a month or two before the new year.

A few assumptions - not good :)

Any programs shown as complete does NOT mean any have been tested in any way :)
They have not apart from do they load and the first screen looks correct -
maybe.

Updated as coding comtinues :

py010 completed for Employee data entry which replace 3 basic programs.

So now we have Payroll menu completed options for :-

A - Date Entry
H - Print Payment Register  - pyrgstr [ temp prog name ]
I - Account Entry           - py920
J - Deduction/Earning Entry - py900
K - History Entry           - py930
L - Employee Data Entry     - py010
R - Print Yearly 940 Report - print940 [ temp prog name ]
T - Print Employee Report   - empprint [ temp prog name ]
U - Print History Report    - hisprint [ temp prog name ]
V - Print Vacation Report   - vacprint [ temp prog name ]
W - Print Account List      - py920 option 2 ( of 2)
Y - Payroll Parameter Entry - py900
Z - ACAS System Setup       - sy002 - Existing program.

Options M and N removed as data entry is in py010 via a sub menu.

Still outstanding as of 11th March 2026

B - Pay Transaction Entry
C - Pay Transaction Proof
D - Pay Transaction Sort   - May not be needed.
E - Apply Payroll
F - Print Payroll Journal
G - Print Pay Checks/BACS
O - Print Quarterly 941 Report
P - Print Current Quarter
Q - Print W2 Report
S - End Current Year

NOTE that the program name are subject to change as more programs/modules are
coded - I would like to use py100 and up for print programs.
and py0nn for Pay data entry.
Of course could end up changing my mind on this and yes such changes will mean
changes to the payroll menu program but am considering moving all print
functions to a separate menu program say using py100 for that purpose with
py110 onwards for each one.

Will also consider using RW (Report Writer) where ever possible for them,
providing the reports are straight forward to code as my RW skill set is
very, very rusty, and so far has not reduce the amount of coding needed by
much.

The one benefit is to keep most of the coding in the RD WS area - providing I
can work out how to do them using RW :)

I was never a high user of RW as most off the compilers did not have it,
possibly IBM, ICL, Honeywell, Burroughs,  etc, wanted more money to add the
facility into the Cobol compiler monthly or as a one off payment, etc.
One of the main benefits of using the GNU Cobol compiler as it is free to obtain
and use and work on all *nix systems including Linux, OSX and even Windows.

Double bonus.

14/12/2025 Notes

PY930 started to process :-
1. Employee Historic totals passed to Company histories.
2. Company Liabilities (taxes collected on behalf of State, Federal & Local
government.
3. Payment history of taxes paid both employee contributions and company.

This is mostly the screens used with only basic coding to date.

So as of today coded programs are :
payroll	- Main menu for Payroll.

py000	- Date entry - allows change of today's date.

py010	- Employee data entry four screens containing :
          1. Primary Data entry included name & address etc.
          2. Earn/Ded & Cost entry.
          3. Rate Data entry.
          4. Employee History entry.
          The last one to record payments of new employee from last employer
          for current year.

py900	- Company data entry:
	      1. Company ID and general data.
	      2. Pay Intervals and Default Employee Payroll Data.
          3. Payroll System Configuration and GL Interface.
          4. Standard Deduction Rates.
          5. Federal Withholding Tax Table Entry.
          6. System Earning and Deduction Information

py920   - Account Table maintenance.

py930   - Employee History maintenance.

py9nn   - Tax table data entry per state, local and Federal by current and next year.



These program name / numbers are subject to change and more than likely will be.
Some may be merged together.

The py100 series will be for reports of all types mostly with py100 acting as menu.
py110 and onwards for each report type including 940, 941 and W-2 reports.

py0nn  series for handling the primary processing with py010 written more or less.

py20 +  to process the main payroll apply processes and pay data entry steps.

The copy books stored in folder copybooks are subject to changes where some field
formats were guessed at and closer examination of the basic code as well as new
Cobol code reveals some more changes as new coding is added.

Update the payroll manual in folder ACAS-Manuals which is 1.0 or v1.0C for the
Cobol version.

The ones ending in 1.0B are for the CBasic version only which is stored within
Basic-Code folder.

A lot more to do.

02/01/2026   - Update but mostly from December 2025 : -

New program still in development hisprint.cbl to replace hisprint.bas.
This program have may well be changed to the std convention of pynnn later on
but it helps me see what has been done via the basic programs etc.

From the 15th December to today I have been unable to do any work on payroll due
to being away for 10 days and then to find on return our heating system was
broken and was far too cold to even think of doing anything and to top it off I
had a fault with Linux that caused a moving screen when ever I moved the mouse.
It has now been fixed and likewise our C.H. boiler has been replaced although
not fully operational - hopefully in the next two days - well I can live in
hope :(

Will be trying to start again around 17th January 2026.

Just have to remember where I was ....
hisprint almost complete - needs to test the code and minor changes for RW.

Creating a TODO (& Done) file to remind me what the status of program and what
still needs doing taking content from here to start with.

09/03/2026   - Updates and up to date full list - current position.

empprint   - Employee report by category if required.
hisprint   - Employee History report
payroll    - Updated.
print940   - Print 940 form at End of year.
py000      - Today's Date updater.
py010      - Employee data entry in FULL as replaces many basic progs
             May need more coding.
py900      - Payroll parameter menu and fixed data maintenance.
py920      - Account number maintenance and report.
py930      - Coding completed.
vacprint   - Vacations report
pyrgstr    - Check register report.

copybooks:

wspyparam1 - Updated 1 or 2 fields from x to bin-short.

Sundries:

README     - opps that is this file :)
build-cbasic.txt
           - How to use this program.

Cbasic program sources that have been migrated etc have been moved from folder
Basic-Code to Basic-Code/Completed-Migrations and no, this folder is not in svn
as not needed by anyone - the original basic code is still present though at
the higher folder level if needed.

Talking of Basic code I have created a small program that reads basic source,
creating o/p file with the include routines added, BUT it needs to be run
2 times.

Read the notes for using it in file build-cbasic.txt but a snapshot:

For those that wish to use it the driving params are :
build-cbasic P1 P2  io-file.ext P3 P4  where
P1 =  In FN.txt  ie, input-file.ext
P2 =  Out FN.ext ie, output-file.ext
P3 = basic file extensions ie ".bas" or ".BAS" - depending on case of sources.
P4 = folder holding the include sources.

So examples of a run where the output file names are extended with '-1', '-2'
etc (so that when using a text editor like kate it knows that it is a basic
source file ) :

cd Basic-Code
build-cbasic print940.bas print940-1.bas ".bas" includes
build-cbasic print940-1.bas print940-2.bas ".bas" includes

Output from program on above example is :

build-cbasic print940.bas print940-1.bas ".bas" includes
build-cbasic v1.0.7 Starting
SY006 Not Found includes/ipypr2.bas continuing
SY006 Not Found ipypr2.bas continuing
EOC - Completed - Phase n
Src in  -    389
Src out -    905
Inc In  -    517

build-cbasic print940-1.bas print940-2.bas ".bas" includes
build-cbasic v1.0.7 Starting
SY006 Not Found includes/ipypr2.bas continuing
SY006 Not Found ipypr2.bas continuing
EOC - Completed - Phase n
Src in  -    906
Src out -  1,285
Inc In  -    380

Here  the o/p shows that one include file cannot be found in both the
Basic-code folder and the includes folder so there is no reason for another run
as indicated by the SY006 messages.

The reason for doing more than one pass is that the program only has one include
file area declared so if there are includes in the source of an include it will
not process it but will report that this occurred via the SY006 message.

So there is one include file that is missing - luckily not important - I hope.

I have added this program to the cobol sources.



Vincent Coen
Create  15/10/2025.
Updated 11/11/2025.
Updated 03/12/2025.
Updated 14/12/2025.
Updated 02/01/2026.
Updated 03/02/2026.
Updated 09/03/2026.
